Team 8 Lab Notebook
MICB475
Mari Aiko Job, Zee Muradi, Carly Pistawka, Janet Wu


6 month olds or 12 months old for both datasets
Male vs Female?
Lifestyle characteristics between geographical populations (Peru vs. USA)
Diet composition (BM, BM+solids, BM+liquids)


Comparison of 6 months vs. 12 months across different populations (Infant vs Anemia)
Changes from 6 month to 12 month (microbial diversity shift) -




Previous paper in UJEMI: Exclusive breastfeeding may decrease overall diversity of the infant gut microbiome with a shift towards dominance of bacterial taxa associated with lactose metabolism 

underweight/normal weight/over????


Table of Contents:



START
TA Supervisor: Avril Metcalfe-Roach (avril.metcalfe-roach@msl.ubc.ca) 

31/01/23  W4 TM - Week 4 Team Meeting

Agenda
1. Meet and get to know Professor and TA supervisor.
2. Discuss what the expectations are for Project 2. 
3. Talk about potential Project 2 topics.

Potential Project 2 Research Questions

Meeting Minutes
Github for the code / lab notebook ? 
Keep them in separate files
Think of a research question and bring it to the next team meeting
Only two team meetings left before we have to submit proposal
Build on more complicated project 
Cannot pool data together -- but can use 6m and 12m both in analysis but as different groups
Combine 2+ datasets? Find metadata categories that overlap this may be cool to look at
Anemia and infant feeding preferences may have overlap in categories
Both have samples at 6month and 12m
Both give info on diets - BM or ‘combined’ (BM and Liquids and/or solids
Could have more subquestions



Anemia paper link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30351381/

For next meeting
Decide on what platform to use for lab notebook
Finalize topic and research question?
CC Evelyn on email re: platform we decide on




07/02/2023 W5 TM - Week 5 Team Meeting

Agenda
1. Let TA Supervisor know about decision to use GitHub as the platform for lab notebook.
2. Discuss potential topics and research questions for Project 2. 

Meeting Minutes
GitHub for Desktop
Two avenues -> lifestyle differences (Peru vs United States), comparing 6 and 12 months infants for both Peru and US (looking at differences and similarities between populations) 
Make sure that datasets can be comparable, double check methodology that can affect microbiome
Check supplementary materials 
Adding a lot of questions in proposals is better
We are thinking of moving away from diet since there is a UJEMI paper that used the “Eating Behavior in Infants” dataset
Add another variable to our question → maybe female vs male?
Flesh out ideas on what information we have right now
Start on proposal as soon as possible
Differential abundance testing - DESeq2 
Can look at diversity metrics and generate table that compares study 1 vs study 2 (then 6 months vs 12 months + descriptions) 
Piecrust2 - to annotate  
Can check Nature papers to see how other authors explain their methodology?
Controlling for variables - remove effects of other variables that will affect the ones you are studying (filtering them out?)

Do we have methods and supplementary/anything for the feeding preference paper???
Reach out to one or two of groups that have already published using dataset 
Continue conversation with authors that we are in contact with
May be a difficult study to work with since there is no publication
If ends up being huge issue, we can just use the one dataset
Ask evelyn how to find more information

Inflammatory effects in the microbiome (anemia paper)
Crp (c reactive protein) = inflammatory marker
Look at stage of infection - how many samples do we have that we could use
Check if any other categories are inflammation-related

For next meeting
Start proposal looking only at anemia dataset
Check methodology we want to use
Check formatting for paper
Finalize research question as soon as possible
Start on DESeq? 
Work on the proposal as much as we can
Process data via qiime2 
Up to importing data to R
Create OTU Table
Look at the papers that use the infant dataset

Have a rough draft of proposal, do qiime2 stuff, DESeq2 
Doesn’t have to be perfect, just something to start with


In future: we will need to create ‘table 1’
collect all info and summarize it up
number males and females, number 12m vs 6m
 different variables that overlap
 
14/02/2023 W6 TM - Week 6 Team Meeting

Agenda:

To talk about what has been done so far in terms of preparation for the project proposal.
To discuss the research questions and experimental aims formulated by the team.
To finalize our research topic and question for Project 2. 

Meeting Minutes
Update from author - BRINDA has 60 different datasets but none from Peru so we might be looking at data from US as well; uses 6 months and 12 months 
Compare our data with BRINDA R-package ?
Aim 5 is another project, either pick Aims 1 & 4 vs Aim 5
First 4 aims are good for the proposal
For controls: remove anemic and have parasites
Check how many infants we will be left with, ensure you have a big enough sample size
Normal samples = ~80; about 4 or 5 have parasites 
But we have to separate 6 months vs 12 months because microbiome would be too different
Look at spread of CRP and AGP, if they are too similar, it will be difficult to get a significant difference
Filter data correctly (stratify → put samples into specific groups)
WHO has definition of CRP in relation to inflammation; BRINDA has definition of AGP
CRP is for short term; AGP is for long term 
Do not overstratify
Aim 2 - Specify methods we would like to use in determining microbiome composition (diversity metrics to compare everything)
Taxonomic analysis
Keep CRP and AGP as a continuous variable????
Start with 4 bins
Will need to separate normal from anemia, then 6 month from 12 month

logical boutique analysis - continuous analysis 
Under additional 
Taxonomic indicators
- Remove anemic infants
- Focus on inflammation
- Malawi dataset has OTUs 
	- Shannon index plot 


Use qiime for diversity just to check and generate all the graphs - see which ones we are interested in 
Finish in R - vegan r package
Taxonomic analysis - 
	Taxa bar charts in qiime are ugly! Dont use
Indicator taxa analysis - R
	Ujemi dorms paper 2022 - look and see if they published script
Zoom meeting on Thursday 11-12; send draft on Tuesday maybe?
	
Decide on 250 for trimming length? Or 300?
Try 300 first!!
What is lost after denoising?

Week 7 - Team Meeting

Agenda:
Problems with indicator species method, everyone was getting different numbers of ASVs. This would be the method we might be using in our project.
Ask about the feasibility portion of the proposal. 
Discuss the team’s research proposal 

Meeting Minutes:
Indicator species analysis uses machine learning algorithm, there is a little bit of randomness involved in the results 
Further filter results → only consider things that are above a certain cutoff
Send followup email 
DESeq2 → we can do set seed to avoid “randomness” problem 
Discussing aim → Sex and age effects on microbiome
Remove sex because it will be a bigger and more complicated 
Feasibility 
Cut samples in half if necessary because we might not have enough samples
10 samples per category might be too low 
Maybe consider combining CRP and AGP 
Bins: for proposal → high/low for CRP/AGP
Highlight the contention in the field → some studies are contradicting



For next time:
Discuss team proposal?



Feb 28 - Team Meeting

Agenda:
Discuss next steps in data processing (?) re: experimental aims
Discuss aim 3?



Meeting Minutes: 
Aim 3 was a bit difficult to finalize because it’s highly dependent on Aim 1 
Moving to diversity metrics in analysis and differential abundance
Split up code objectives - alpha diversity, beta, differential abundance? 
Use a dummy variable then when the code is finalized, swap the actual variable we’ll be studying
If we don’t have enough samples in the bins, we can use the median instead
Better to just do CRP high/low - based on research or based on median
Repeat using AGP (another aim if we decide to do it)
Avoid question of how much is CRP vs AGP
Excel sheet of metadata - number of samples using the 
Maybe end up doing parasites as a comparison? - 7 infants with parasites at 12M

For next week:
R script for each of the code objectives (should be at least started to be written)
Start by doing 12 month data 
Alpha 
Beta
Differential Abundance
Binning
?
Once create the code, can substitute with 6 months


March 3 - Informal Team Meeting
Agenda
Discuss data processing
Discuss crp threshold
Assign tasks for RStudio

Start using 12 month (health infant) data
Will need to filter out rows with parasites?
Remove rows with no crp value

Analyze CRP and AGP separately


Do we need to remove anemia samples prior to rarefaction? Or can this be done afterwords in R
Determining depth for rarefaction?
10 vs 15 samples minimum?


Need to remove (anemic and not collected from anemia category

AIKO - rarefacted, only healthy samples with anemia
Carly -  Filtering and splitting into files/file manipulation
Rarefy?
Phyloseq objects



